# The Evolution of an Instructor: My Teaching Narrative

In this section, I'll discuss my teaching prior to coming to JMU–both in Japan and at the New Jersey Institute of Technology \(NJIT\)–and then narrate how my teaching role has unfolded here at JMU.  I've borrowed the pre-JMU parts of this narrative from my application for tenure and associate professor, but the section on my evolution as a teacher since I reached JMU has been updated to reflect the last seven years. The goal of this section is to convey to you my trajectory, depth, passion, and maturity as a teacher.  The supporting documents in the teaching section of this portfolio will serve as evidence of my quality.  In other words, the artifacts in my portfolio will demonstrate what I've done, while this narrative will relate why and how I've done these things.

At JMU I am primarily involved in teaching courses in:

* Computer programming from basic to advanced level
* Software development and engineering methodology, including agile development
* Social impacts of computing and technology
* Current trends in technology, such as IoT \(Internet of Things\), VR/AR \(virtual/augmented reality\), blockchain and cryptocurrencies \(e.g. bitcoin\)

In addition to these areas, I have also taught Japanese language and culture, and have participated in a wide variety of other teaching experiences.

## Teaching English in Japan

My first job after graduating from college was as an English teacher in rural junior high schools in Hokkaido, the northernmost island of Japan.  When I took this job I still had no idea that my calling was teaching.  At the time, I would have told you that I wanted to have an adventure in a foreign country where I couldn't speak the language.  I chose Japan because I had been studying judo and zen meditation since my sophomore year in college.  As an undergrad at the University of Richmond I majored in sociology and leadership studies, and minored in physics.  My plan was to spend one or two years in Japan and then come back to the US and figure out what my "real career" would be.  Regardless of my intentions, though, teaching in Japan made a deep impression on me and relating the differences between the US and Japanese educational systems may shed some light on how my teaching philosophy developed while there.

Before I do that I'd like to share part of a journal entry that I wrote on September 5th, 1996, approximately two weeks into my teaching job in Japan \(one of over 200 pages I wrote that first year\).  At the time I was feeling a bit overwhelmed by the job of teaching English while handicapped by my total lack of Japanese language ability.  Using the self-reflective skills my mentors at UR had taught me, I drew upon my own experience to develop a plan for the future:

> When do/did **I** learn the most?  I have energy.  I am engaged.  I am challenged.  I am confident that I can learn AND I perceive that what I’m learning is important to me.  Therefore, my goals for my class environment are:
>
> 1. Students are energetic
> 2. Students minds are engaged
> 3. Students are challenged
> 4. Students believe that they can learn, and
> 5. Students believe English is important to learn

It is amazing to me that my values at age 22 are the same as they are today.  The major difference is that now I know and understand the science of teaching and learning that demonstrates why my then intuitive perspective is a sound one.

In Japan, unlike the US, the accomplishments \(or failures\) of the individual student are not that important.  In the US, underperforming students must repeat grades.  Westerners believe that individuals are essential and that each person must learn to perform as an individual.  In Japan, however, students must learn to function as part of a group, and as such, the need to remain with one's age cohort trumps individual academic performance.  That doesn't mean that Japanese teachers don't care very deeply about individual students' learning, but it does mean that students will always be promoted to the next grade regardless of their actual learning.

In practice, this was very frustrating for me.  In the centralized Japanese system, all students study English from the seventh grade until graduation from high school.  As such, you'd expect to find a lot of English speakers in Japan, but such is not the case.  What I found was that about 60% of my students failed to grasp even the most basic English concepts during their first year of English study.  Despite that, they were promoted to the second year which builds on the material from the first year.  By the time they reach the third year of English, the number of students who are able to keep up is tiny.  Teaching first year students was fun, but by the time they reached third year, they were so bored and demoralized that it was a very painful experience.

Despite their individual failures to learn English, however, Japanese students are constantly reminded of how important it is for each person to make a valuable contribution to the groups of which they are a part.  Over time I began to see the wisdom of their way of education.  While they may find a class like English boring, Japanese students are not particularly bothered by their lack of proficiency in any particular area so long as they are able to contribute to their classmates in an area of their own strength.  They learn cooperation to an extent that adult Japanese can accomplish complex coordinated action with little, if any, exchange of words.  In a world where we do most of the work in our adult lives in a collaborative, cooperative environment, the Japanese approach makes a lot of sense.

From the Japanese I learned a number of things:

* Cultural beliefs are deeply embedded in our education
* Be humble and open-minded when faced with a radically different approach
* It's tough to learn English when you don't have anything particular to say
* Not to have a dogmatic acceptance for the things I had grown up believing

I learned something about perseverance in trying to adjust my style of teaching to the students I am working with.  Since then I've also learned that American researchers like Deming have recognized the power of the Japanese perspective and shown how their focus on groups and quality can lead to superior performance as was demonstrated by the Japanese auto and electronics industries' dominance through the 70's and 80's.

## Teaching at the New Jersey Institute of Technology

After five years in Japan, I moved my family to New Jersey where I was invited to complete my PhD in Information Systems at NJIT.  What a culture shock!  I was looking forward to moving back to my "home culture," but New Jersey was nothing like Virginia, and NJIT was nothing like the University of Richmond where I'd been an undergrad.  As a full-time lecturer at NJIT and as  grad student I had new transformations in store.

Given my background in sociology, I was assigned to teach a course called "Computers and Society," a 300-level required course in both the Information Systems and Computer Science bachelor's degree programs at NJIT.  Many of NJIT's students were first-generation college students working forty-hour weeks while going to school full time.  They were mostly unprepared for "college-level" work and didn't have a lot of confidence in their abilities.  Not having any understanding nor sensitivity for this, I was very strict with my students and commiserated with colleagues about how unmotivated, and inarticulate they were.  It took me a couple of years to realize that my inflexibility, and my preconceived notion of what students "ought to know" and "ought to be able to do" were not serving anyone well.  In focusing on understanding my students, my Ph.D. studies stalled as I devoted more and more time to my teaching.

The energy I put into teaching led to innovation.  I developed NJIT's first course on server-side web development and allowed students in the course to complete projects using their own choice of programming language: Cold Fusion, PHP, JSP, or ASP.  I wrote [a web-based system that taught students how to record and upload online presentations](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z6sCPq6CEs0) \(in 2004 before people were doing this kind of thing\), and deepened their learning through the peer-evaluation component of the system.  My system was jury rigged into Blackboard before such systems had interfaces for 3rd party plugin developers like myself.  I set up my own PHP server and tried out Moodle, one of the first free, open-source learning management systems.  Because of that experience, I was tapped to serve on a committee under NJIT's VP for IT evaluating our options before renewing our expensive contract with Blackboard.  Before I left NJIT I was nominated and took honorable mention for the university-wide [Excellence in Teaching Award](http://tenure.umatter2.us/wp-content/uploads/2011/09/NJITTeachingAward.pdf).

Given this experience, it is not surprising that my dissertation topic migrated towards the development of online systems to improve teaching and learning.  Eventually I built and tested [QuesGen, an online system to help teachers write better multiple-choice questions](http://tenure.umatter2.us/wp-content/uploads/2011/02/Morgan-Benton-Dissertation.pdf), but before I could get there, I had to dive into the areas of learning, pedagogy, assessment, and teachers' professional development.  My dissertation studies set me up to have several realizations that have shaped the teacher and researcher I've become.

One of my first realizations was that college faculty receive little to no instruction or training in teaching and pedagogy, even though teaching consumes generally one-third to one-half or more of our professional lives.  Teaching is a professional occupation which does not necessarily come intuitively to all of us who are asked to teach at the university level, hence the need for organizations like JMU's Center for Faculty Innovation, and books like _Will McKeachie's Teaching Tips_.  As a web developer, I wanted to build rich online tools that naturally led professors to use sound pedagogy grounded in the science of teaching and learning.

The second realization was the potential conflict of interest that faculty experience between serving students and serving society.  Ken Bain, who was the keynote speaker at the 2011 CFI May Symposium at JMU, articulates this conflict in his book _What the Best College Teachers Do_.  In discussing how great professors prepare to teach, he describes a number of questions teachers ask themselves, including, "\#9. How will I find out how students are learning before assessing them, and how will I provide feedback before–and separate from–any assessment of them?" \(p57\)  In his discussion he makes the following observation:

> The professor holds a dual role, first, to help students learn, and second, to tell society how much learning has taken place.  The intent of this ninth question is to recognize the distinctions between these two responsibilities and restore the primacy of the first. \(p58\)

My reading of King's College of London professors Dylan Wiliam and Paul Black's book _Assessment for Learning_ taught me how these roles can be in conflict.  Grades become ego-involving, i.e. a student's sense of self-worth becomes dependent upon these external judgments of their work.  When faced with a "negative" judgment, the need to preserve self-esteem leads them to put up defensive barriers against the feedback, compromising the learning opportunity.  Alternatively, students may develop a belief in a fixed ability level, only alterable by outsiders–a problem when research demonstrates that learning is most robust in students who believe that they a\) can improve their ability, and b\) have the power to do it themselves.  Wiliam and Black's research showed that grades tend to be more ego-involving than other feedback.  As such, society's demand that professors grade may put them into conflict with what is known to be best for fostering student learning.

The third realization I made concerned class size.  As a lecturer I taught large sections of eighty or more students, with semesters in which my total enrollments were close to 150.  Such class sizes prevented me from employing the techniques and best practices I was garnering from the literature, and getting to know students as closely as I would like.  Building on my experience as a distance learning student \(the first two years of my master’s degree at NJIT were completed from Japan–I never set foot on NJIT campus\), I began to develop online videos \(tough when many people still used dial-up!\) and software that would automate administrative, one-way communication, improving my efficiency and leaving me time to get closer to my students.

I was fortunate to get to meet Dylan Wiliam and work with him and other well-known researchers in the professional educational measurement world as an intern at the Educational Testing Service \(ETS\) during the summer of 2004.  While at ETS, I saw firsthand how professional tests are developed, and how they are scored.  I was able to observe teachers involved in scoring the AP English, Latin, and Studio Art exams.  I worked as a developer on the MathTCA software system that attempted to automate the creation of high-quality math questions for standardized tests.  Through these experiences, coupled with my reading in item response theory \(IRT\) and research into multiple-choice question generation, I became deeply skeptical of the validity of tests and other assessments that I had designed for my students.

The depth and breadth of my perspective toward teaching changed dramatically in my five years at NJIT.  Unfortunately, the funding for my position dried up before I had completed my dissertation and I was thrown into the job market earlier than I would have liked.  Fortunately, that happened to be the year that ISAT was looking for a new computing professor.

## Teaching at JMU

Since coming to JMU, I have continued to broaden and deepen my knowledge and skills in the two areas that Lee Shulman, an expert in teacher professional development, describes as the pillars of effective teaching:

* **Subject Matter Knowledge**: knowledge about the subject that one is teaching, and
* **Pedagogical Content Knowledge**: knowledge about how people learn and the techniques teachers can use to support that learning.

I have worked constantly and consistently throughout my time here to become a [recognized expert in my field](/teaching/stackoverflow.md) and also a [recognized expert in the ways in which I can foster understanding](//service/course_evals.md) about my field among the students that I interact with.

I am primarily responsible for teaching courses in programming and web development.  These domains are still young and _**very**_ volatile.  The languages and techniques used by software and web developers change rapidly and may become partly or largely obsolete on time scales that range from eighteen months to two years.  In order to deepen my subject matter knowledge I have spent a considerable amount of time learning a broad array of languages and technologies, and staying current in the languages I knew previously.  I  [sponsored weekly "hacking sessions"](/teaching/hacking.md) from 2008 to 2013  so that I could involve students in my exploration and also be responsive to and knowledgeable about the technologies they would like to use for solving problems.  I have [mentored a large number of senior projects](/teaching/capstones.md), many of which required me to work hard to keep up with my students, who chose cutting edge platforms upon which to build.  I have [attended conferences and workshops](/scholarship/meetings.md) focused on software development such as the 23rd IEEE-CS Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training \(CSEE&T 2010\) in Pittsburgh, and the Agile Software Development 2011 Conference in Salt Lake City where I met, interacted with, and learned from some of the most famous members of the agile software development community like Alistair Cockburn.  I have also kept my skills sharp by employing them in the service of outside consulting clients and on [research grants](/scholarship/funding.md).  I feel comfortable saying that I know as much or more than any other person at JMU about web and mobile app development.

Likewise I have worked to deepen my pedagogical content knowledge.  I have [attended a broad array of professional development conferences, workshops and symposia](/teaching/conferences.md).  I observed over 50 classes and discussed effective teaching strategy with over 1000 students in my service as a Teaching Analysis Poll \(TAP\) Consultant.  I [conducted over 700 interviews with students and analyzed their written semester narratives](/teaching/evaluations.md). I have also benefitted \(and benefitted my students\) by being the recipient of TAP analyses in many of my classes.  I spent a year exploring the characteristics of the “millennial generation” as a Madison Teaching Fellow.  I have engaged in extensive reading and research to deepen my pedagogical understanding such as my [choose-your-own-grade research](/teaching/cyog.md), and the ongoing [development of a web-based learning management system](/teaching/courseware.md) \(LMS\) I am developing called UMatter2Us.  I have reviewed articles for journals and conferences related to information systems and computing education such as the Journal of Information Systems Education and Computers & Education.  I have [taught in a number of different types of classes, contexts and formats including lecture courses](/teaching/contexts.md), lab courses, discussion sections, independent studies, international programs \(SERM\), and through the development of a summer study abroad program to Japan.  I have spent a great deal of time discussing effective pedagogy as a member of team-teaching teams and through one-on-one conversations colleagues have sought to have with me.  I have been a part of [building cross-campus, interdisciplinary partnerships](//teaching/fueled.md) designed to blend teaching, research, practice, and experiential learning.

All of these efforts have resulted in a number of concrete achievements.  I am known across campus as an expert in pedagogy and course evaluation and am sought after to participate in and lead groups of faculty like the [Faculty Senate Academic Policies Committee and task forces on academic rigor and course evaluation, both at the departmental and university level](/service/course_evals.md). My [syllabi](/supporting_materials/syllabi.md) have evolved to become what Ken Bain refers to as "promising syllabi."  I have [produced numerous course websites and course videos](/teaching/courseware.md) as well as high quality labs.  My subject matter and pedagogical content knowledge expertise continues to be recognized as I initiate and am asked to participate in grant-funded research, build websites for external and internal clients, and deliver invited talks to colleagues. I [developed the pre-semester questionnaire technique](/teaching/questionnaires.md).  I’ve been able to publish papers on teaching and learning and present them at refereed conferences.  I led the effort to produce BSISAT Program Goal K, and also contributed language for the JMU faculty handbook that sets standards for the quality and frequency of instructor feedback.  Of the senior projects I’ve mentored, one earned the ISAT Integration Award, a Best Honors Thesis Award, and was published as a poster at the American Wind Energy Association’s annual meeting in Dallas, 2010.  Finally, I’ve also been able to use my expertise to good use in the Harrisonburg community by developing a multilingual website for the Thomas Harrison Middle School PTO, and serving on the Harrisonburg City Schools Gifted Advisory Committee.

## Summary

Taken as a whole, I believe this evidence demonstrates that _**I am an excellent teacher**_.  Beginning with my first job in Japan and continuing through the present, I have been committed to my craft and energized by the challenge and the opportunity to help students mature and develop as people and as professionals, becoming enlightened citizens who lead meaningful and productive lives.  Furthermore, not only have I improved as an individual, but I have become known as an expert on pedagogy within JMU and internationally, and am frequently consulted by colleagues and asked to present at meetings, workshops, and symposia.  My efforts therefore have resulted in an overall increase in the quality of teaching at JMU, particularly within ISAT.

